---
author: Nazmul Idris
date: 2015-11-05 18:41:26+00:00
excerpt: |
  How I code and how I live.
layout: post
hero-image: assets/loosely-coupled-strongly-coherent.png
title: 'Loosely Coupled and Strongly Coherent'
categories:
- Stories
---

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->


- [Programming by contract](#programming-by-contract)
- [Empowerment](#empowerment)
- [Enablement](#enablement)
- [Applying to self](#applying-to-self)
- [Rippling outward](#rippling-outward)
- [The struggle](#the-struggle)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->


People need space in which to evolve. In good relationships each person should
have their own expectation of having space so that they can grow. If this isn’t
the case and one person changes, then the whole arrangement breaks apart — which
is painful. This can be applied to software engineering as well. I was so good
at doing this in software and had been so bad at doing this in my life. When I
[rewrote my OS and apps and service
stacks]({{'/2015/10/31/how-i-got-everything-wrong-about-everything/' |
relative_url }}) over the last 2.5 yrs I decided to internalize this concept and
live it and be it. If you are curious to hear the story of how I managed this,
then read on.

I’ve always struggled with the concept of space in interpersonal relationships
(primarily because I [never gave myself the space I
needed]({{'/2015/11/03/show-up-in-the-right-light/' | relative_url }}), or even
acknowledged my own needs in the past). On the one hand, I realize how important
it is to be supported when you need help, and on the other hand, I’ve come to
realize that there’s a difference between facilitating someone in doing
something vs doing it for them.

I’m an engineer, an artist, a believer, a dreamer, and a fighter. However, when
it comes to thinking through stuff and executing on things, I’m strongly
influenced by my engineering side. And a long time ago, I came up with the core
values that I hold true for good software engineering and that is “loose
coupling and strong coherence”. I have been coding to this ethos for as long as
I have been coding (for a quarter century as of 2015). Create stuff that works
well together, and all the stuff that you build, gives the other stuff that you
build room to change and evolve.

<p class="big-quote">How I figured this out so early on in building software,
but didn’t in managing relationships for almost 20 years eludes me.</p>

## Programming by contract

To give you more specifics, in software engineering the touch points between
components can be declared in a contract. And as long as a module can provide
the underlying implementation for this contract, then another component can
interface with it. And a module can be swapped out without disrupting any other
modules (as long as the new module respect this contract). This is an incredibly
powerful form of abstraction, encapsulation, and interconnection that can be
used to create really robust codebases that are conducive to evolution. The
difficult part is iterating on the design and implementation of this software to
come up with really good contracts. It takes some experience and some iteration
to get these right.

<p class="big-quote">What if you were to apply this to relationships, what would
that look like?</p>

Well before I do that, I need to focus in on one type of interconnection between
people, and that is one person helping another or providing support to another.
In talking about this concept, I want to outline the difference between
empowerment and enablement. Let’s say that you want to help someone, or you need
help from another. What form do you expect this help to be delivered in? Do you
want someone to actually do the heavy lifting for you, or actually make you
stronger so that you can do the heavy lifting yourself? There’s an old
adage — “give a woman a fish and you feed her for a day; teach a woman to fish
and you feed her for a lifetime”. And that expresses what I’m about to breakdown
next.

## Empowerment

This form of help or support assumes that the person that’s being helped can
actually help themselves, and is able to do things on their own. However, they
need some assistance in triggering their internal mechanism to get going.
There’s a tremendous amount of respect given by the helper to the
helpee — because the helper assumes that the helpee is an empowered and capable
person, that just needs an assist in a way that they’re not able to generate for
themselves right now. But the idea is to get their internal process started, so
that they can go off and do this on their own.

Some call this “tough love”. This form of love is not easy to give or receive,
because there has to be a pretty clear intention set at the get go between both
helper and helpee that this is not some kind of permanent crutch or codependency
situation. The helper doesn’t take on the burden of the helpee. And the helpee
has to be given the room in which to make mistakes and evolve, without
micromanagement from the helper. And this is almost counterintuitive. This
applies to any type of help being given, whether it’s health related, finance
related, work related, etc. Here are some examples:

- An example of this is when someone sees a doctor for a condition, they look
deeply into the root cause of the condition, and address that to affect a cure,
rather than superficially address symptoms that don’t actually go away.

- Another example of this in parent child relationships is where a parent gives
their child some room in which to grow and make their own mistakes and learn
from it, rather than trying to be overprotective of the child. Overprotection
would keep the child from developing strength that will be necessary in everyday
life as the child matures.

- Yet another example in romantic relationships is where one partner doesn’t
allow the negative emotions of another totally overrule their own feelings. By
keeping this at bay, they are able to maintain a sense of self and calm and
stability, while being empathetic towards their partner, but not getting totally
washed away by their current negative state. This actually facilitates the
person having the bad day to snap out of it, and come back to their center,
rather than both people just nosediving into the rabbit hole.

## Enablement

This form of help is actually easier to give and receive (though it’s not as
virtuous as empowerment). It feeds on the empathy that the helper feels for the
helpee. This type of help takes the form of actually enabling someone to remain
in the suboptimal situation that that they’re in right now, because it’s too
difficult to get them to take ownership of the core issues that constitute the
real problem which needs to be solved. It tends to be easier, and nicer, and
kinder to simply pat someone on the back, and say that they should just keep
doing what they’re doing, and just enable them to propagate their current
behavior into the future. It is incredibly difficult to take a step back and
look at what the real issue is, and then let go of fear and then actually push
the helpee to make a significant change that they feel that they can’t
make — because they are so afraid of what might happen.

- An example of this in a parent child relationship is when a parent gives their
child the benefit of their experience, without giving the child a chance to make
mistakes and learn on their own and come up with their own best practices. The
parent thinks that they are being really kind by saving the child from the pain
they’re going to face. But in doing so, they disable the child from being able
to handle learning in life.

- Another example of this in a romantic relationship is that one partner doesn’t
allow the other to overcome a fear that they have, because they can’t bear to
see their partner in pain or be afraid or anxious of this thing that they’re
afraid of. By allowing their partner to hide from this problem, they’re just
propagating fear and insecurity in the partner, and not really help them become
stronger and overcome this issue. Empowering them to overcome this issue would
enhance the quality of life of the partner, and bring more peace into the
relationship.

In this case, the intention to help actually propagates the helpee’s negative
situation. Instead of getting better, the negative situation just keeps getting
extended into the future. And the helper and helpee become intertwined in
codependency. This is a pretty disempowering pattern. And it doesn’t really
benefit the helper or the helpee. It usually comes about from people unwilling
to face the fear of letting go, so that people can make their own mistakes,
learn from them, and grow stronger from having made those mistakes and improving
their situation. When the helper takes this opportunity away from the helpee,
it’s disempowering and it’s very disrespectful, because it feeds the insecurity
and fear of the helpee, and the helper pities the helpee, rather than respecting
them.

<p class="big-quote">So how do you put this together into having healthy
relationships of all kinds?</p>

## Applying to self

It all starts with self, and then it radiates out to all the other people that
you interact with. Inside of yourself, you have different parts that gravitate
towards different emotions. Some parts of you are brave. Others are more prone
to worry and fear. And so on. In order to evolve as a person, you have to give
yourself room to grow as well, and create an environment for yourself which
gives you the room to take chances, fail, and learn from them and evolve.

At the same time, give yourself some stability as well, so that not everything
is being disrupted all the time. This tug of war between change and stability is
where loose coupling and strong coherence comes into play inside of yourself.
You have to:

- have the same goal for all of you,

- [know who you are]({{'/2015/11/03/show-up-in-the-right-light/' | relative_url
}}), what you need and want,

- orient all parts of you to this shared goal,

- give each of the different parts of you space and room in which to shift and
grow,

- be able to absorb these internal disruptions into your entire being, and still
keep moving forwards.

If you are able to start doing this inside of yourself, you are then going to be
able to reflect this into all the relationships in your life (automagically).
The work that you have to do is the same for self and for relationships with
others. That’s the good news. The bad news is that it’s incredibly difficult to
do this within yourself — which is why codependency and enablement is so easy!

## Rippling outward

Scaling this out to other relationships is very similar to the inner work you
have to do. Think of how you orchestrated different parts of you, by giving them
some space and orienting to some common goals and having some patience. The
process is very similar for relationships with others.

You have to give yourself some space in which to evolve, and not be too strongly
coupled with others in your life, such that small disruptions in yourself or in
the other, fracture your relationship. If your relationships follow a pattern of
codependency, that just means that they’re too strongly coupled.

And you need to replace some of these direct linkages / interconnection
(implementation) with things are more abstracted (interfaces or
contracts) — meaning that each person is responsible for implementing these
contracts. You are not implementing the contract for the other and vice versa.
This is a very empowering pattern. Because you recognize that you need some room
in which to evolve, and so do they. And then you give each other this room.
While being totally aligned on the goals that are important to both of
you — because you know yourselves, and know what you need and want (at least the
most important stuff).

## The struggle

It’s not easy to find this balance. It’s especially difficult to find this
within yourself. The secret is that if you can figure this out inside of you, it
will make all the other relationships much easier to form and manage and evolve.
You might think that you have to work really hard and have to do things in order
for some relationships to work; this is a signal that something is wrong. The
work that you have to do is — just be yourself, and you have to know who you are
and what you want and need. The rest takes care of itself.

<p class="big-quote">Show yourself in the right light, your light, and that is
the work that you do all the time — whether it’s with self, or with anyone
else.</p>

To giving ourselves (and others that we are in relationships with) this space to
evolve and connect closer to self and each other!